This problems presents
Huffman Encoding
which produces variable-length
encodings based
on the probabilities
of the occurrence
of each different choice.
More likely choices will end
up with shorter encodings
than less likely choices.
The goal of this
problem is to produce
a Huffman code to encode
student choices of majors.
There are a total of 4 majors,
and each has a probability
associated with it.
To produce a Huffman encoding,
one begins with the 2 choices
with lowest probability.
In this example, major 6-7,
has a probability of 0.06,
and major 6-1, has a
probability of 0.09.
Since these are the two lowest
probabilities, these two
choices are selected
as the starting point
for building our encoding tree.
The root node that
combines the two choices,
has a probability equal to
the sum of the leaf nodes,
or 0.15 in this example.
We then label one side
of this tree with a 0
and the other with a 1.
The next step is to find the
next two smallest probabilities
out of the remaining set
of probabilities where
majors 6-1 and 6-7 have been
replaced by node A which
has probability 0.15.
In this case, our
lowest probabilities
are 0.15 (which is the
probability of node A)
and 0.41 (which is the
probability of major 6-3).
So we create a new node B
that merges nodes A and 6-3.
This new node has
probability 0.56.
Again we label the two
branches, one with a 0
and the other with a 1.
We now repeat this
process one last time
with the only two
remaining choices which
are now node B and major 6-2.
This means that we should
make a new node C that merges
node B and major 6-2.
Note that the
probability of this node
is 1.0 because we have
reached the top of our tree.
Our final step is to label
these last two branches.
Now that all the
branches are labeled,
we can traverse the tree from
the root node to each leaf node
in order to identify
the encoding that
has been assigned to the major
associated with that leaf node.
We find that for major
6-1 the encoding is 101.
For major 6-2, we end up
with a 1-bit encoding of 0.
Next we traverse the tree to
identify the last two encodings
and find that for major 6-3 the
encoding 11 has been assigned,
and for major 6-7 the encoding
100 has been assigned.
These encodings make
sense because we
expect the major with
the highest probability,
in this case major 6-2 to end
up with the shortest encoding.
The next highest
probability major
is 6-3 so it ends up with
the second shortest encoding,
and so on.
We just saw that the encodings
resulting from this Huffman
encoding tree are: 101 for
major 6-1, a 0 for major 6-2,
11 for major 6-3, and
100 for major 6-7.
Note that the Huffman
encoding tree for this problem
could have also been
drawn like this.
These two trees are identical
in structure and result
in the same encodings
for the four majors.
Furthermore, a Huffman tree
can result in more than one
valid encoding.
The only constraint
in labeling the edges
is that from each node, there is
both a 0 branch and a 1 branch
but there are no constraints
about which side has to be
labeled 0 and which side 1.
So for example, we
could have chosen
to label the left side
of the B node with a 1
and the right side with
a 0 instead of the way we
originally labeled them.
Note, however, that
this would result
in a different but also
valid Huffman encoding.
In this case the encoding
for major 6-1 is 111,
major 6-2 remains 0,
major 6-3 becomes 10,
and major 6-7 becomes 110.
As long as one
maintains consistency
across the selected tree,
a valid Huffman encoding
is produced.
We now add one more column
to our table which gives p *
log2(1/p) for each
of the majors.
Using this information we
can calculate the entropy
which is the average
amount of information
contained in each message.
This is calculated by taking
the sum of p * log2(1/p) for all
choices of majors.
For this problem,
the entropy is 1.6.
We can now also calculate
the average bits
per major of the encodings
that we have identified.
This is calculated
by multiplying
the number of bits in each
encoding times the probability
of that major.
Recall that our
encoding for major 6-1
was 111, for major 6-2 it was
0, for major 6-3 it was 10,
and finally for
major 6-7 it was 110.
This means that the average
bits per major is 3 times
0.09 plus 1 times
0.44 plus 2 times
0.41 plus 3 times 0.06 =
0.27 plus 0.44 plus 0.82
plus 0.18 which equals 1.71.
Note that this is
slightly larger
than the entropy which is 1.6.
This occurs because
while Huffman encoding is
an efficient encoding which
gets us most of the way
there, there are still
some inefficiencies present
in Huffman encoding
because it is only
encoding one major at a time
rather than also considering
the probabilities
associated with seeing
a particular sequence of
majors in a message that
conveys the major selected for
a large number of students.